SWMM-CAT Version 1.1 is an update from Version 1.0. It is a utility that adds location-specific climate change adjustments to a Storm Water Management Model (SWMM) project file. Adjustments can be applied on a monthly basis to air temperature, evaporation rates, and precipitation, as well as to the 24-hour design storm at different recurrence intervals. The source of these adjustments are global climate change models run as part of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) archive. Downscaled results from this archive were generated and converted into changes with respect to historical values by USEPA's CREAT 3.1 project (https://www.epa.gov/crwu/climate-resilience-evaluation-and-awareness-tool-creat-risk-assessment-application-water).

The data used in SWMM-CAT are found on https://www.epa.gov/crwu/access-data-creating-resilient-water-utilities.  The guide for using these data is https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-09/crwu-data-user-guide-final_1.pdf. The reference for the information below is EPA's Climate Resilience Evaluation and Awareness Tool Version 3.1 Methodology Guide (https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/documents/creat_3.1_methodology_guide_march_2021.pdf).

The following steps are used to select a set of adjustments to apply to SWMM:

1) Enter the latitude and longitude coordinates of your location if available or its 5-digit zip code. SWMM-CAT will display a range of climate change scenarios for the CMIP5 results closest to your location.

2) Select whether to use climate change projections based on either a near term or far term projection period. The displayed climate change scenarios will be updated to reflect your choice.

3) Select a climate change scenario to save to SWMM. There are three choices that span the range of scenarios produced by Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5, a high greenhouse gas emissions trajectory used in the CMIP5 project. CREAT 3.1 uses an ensemble-informed selection method to define the three scenarios. The Hot/Dry scenario represents models whose average temperature change was on the high end and whose average rainfall change was on the lower end of all model projections. The Warm/Wet scenario represents models whose average temperature change was on the lower end and whose average rainfall change was on the wetter end of the spectrum. The Central scenario is for models whose temperature and rainfall changes were closest to the median of all models. Then, select an extreme storm scenario. No Change (Historical) represents historic 24-hour rainfall depths for return periods of 5, 10, 15, 30, 50, and 100 years. 

A stormy future scenario represents ensemble-averaged models that produce a higher change in precipitation per degree of warming for the 5-year storm event and a less stormy future scenario represents models with lower changes in precipitation per degree of warming. Projections for each future scenario are available for two future time periods, 2035 (averaged projections from years 2025 - 2045) and 2060 (averaged projections from years 2050 - 2070). The future time periods were chosen based on feedback EPA received from water utilities about future planning scenarios needed to support infrastructure or operational changes.

The effect that these climate projections have on monthly average rainfall and annual extreme rainfall events are shown graphically in the right-hand panel. These effects will change with choice of location and projection year. An annual max. day rainfall X with a return period of Y years means that on average, a 24-hour storm greater than X inches will occur only once every Y years.

Evaporation is calculated based on projected temperatures using the Hargreaves method (Hargreaves and Samani, 1985).

4) Click the Save Adjustments to SWMM link to bring up a dialog form that will allow you select an existing SWMM project file to save your adjustments to. The form will also allow you to select which type of adjustments (monthly temperature, evaporation, rainfall, or 24-hour design storm) to save. Conversion of temperature and evaporation units is automatically handled depending on the unit system (US or SI) detected in the SWMM file.

